---
layout: post
title:  "Nouman Ali Khan - Description thématique 5"
author: "RouteDeLaSpiritualité"
---

# Surat luqman (31) - suite

## Ayat 12 (suite)

"wa man kafara fa ina Allah ghaniyou el 7amid" translate as "and whoever were to be ungrateful, then certainly Allah is free of need". This is a very powerful statement made by Allah and lets try to understand it. Allah is saying that he does not need me to be grateful to him and he does not need me for anything. People ask the question "why does Allah need me to thank him?". "ghani" means "someone who is independent" and has no need of you. The only person who is in need is us: we need to breathe, we need to have our heart beating etc and we do not thank Him for that. We can never thank Allah enough for what He has done. We don't even know the ways Allah is protecting us, we just have no idea. Allah says in the Quran "dja3ala 3alaykoum 7afadha" which means "he put gardian angels on you". These angels are full time on you just to take care of you and protect you. These are the angels taking care of the breaks not failing when you are driving, they are taking care of the drunk person driving on the road not hitting you etc. Allah doesn't need us but we need him and this is why he is "ghani". 
Then, Allah adds "7amid" which refers to someone who praised and shown appreciation **on his own**. In other words, you don't need to show him praise and appreciation because it is true of him even if no creation exists. Even if Allah did not create anything, no earth, no human being nothing, Allah would still be praised. He doesn't need creation to show him gratitude. If we, as human beings, are praised, we are called "Mahmoud". When you say Mahmoud, it actually means that someone praised you, or someone thanked you. 7amid is the state of being praised, even if no one praised you. Allah doesn't need anything or anyone to praise him. 

## Aya 13

> وَإِذْ قَالَ لُقْمَانُ لِابْنِهِ وَهُوَ يَعِظُهُ يَا بُنَيَّ لَا تُشْرِكْ بِاللَّهِ ۖ إِنَّ الشِّرْكَ لَظُلْمٌ عَظِيمٌ - 31:13

> And [mention, O Muhammad], when Luqman said to his son while he was instructing him, "O my son, do not associate [anything] with Allah . Indeed, association [with him] is great injustice."

Let's make a link to sourat al Asr about the fact that Luqman gives his son advice: "wa tawassaw bil haq". Being grateful to Allah is part of sourat al Asr "ila lahdida amanou oua 3amilou sali7at" because being grateful is part of iman. "oua houa ya3idouhou" -> "while he was trying to council him" => the overall lesson is to find the right time to talk to people. There is an opportunity to talk to people at the right place, and the right time and circumstances to council people in truth. The second lesson is that since the word "houwa" is mentionned, it acknowledges the fact that it needs to be the father who gives advice to his son because otherwise the son will be impacted by other things like his friends, television for example. As a father, I should preempt all these influences and be the primary source of advice and council. Then there is the word "wa3ad" from which we get "ya3idouhou" which holds a connotation of love. He gave him loving advice. Luqman makes his son want to talk to him and not hide anything from me by councelling him with love. Wa3adh has the connotation of wanting to reach the emotions of someone. Not be in the position of giving lessons and the son not understanding and running away from the conversation. 
"ya bounaya" means "my beloved little son": it's almost as saying "I love you son". "la touchrik bilah" -> "don't do wrong by allah", "don't associate anyone with Allah". Luqman didn't start with "be good to your parents" or "be good to others" but "be good to Allah". 
Let's look into what does it mean to associate a partner with Allah. We'll use hafidh ibn Tayymiyah explanation. The relationship we have with Allah is that he is our master and we are his slaves. He is rabb and we are 3abd. 

Me as a slave means 5 things:
  1. Worship. I can only worship Him directly. I can only do sajda to Him. There are some glorifications I can only do for Allah and not for anybody else. I will not be able to tolerate the fact that someone is elevated the way Allah is elevated. Certain kind of praises are only for Allah. "wa ana el masadjida lilahi fala tad3o ma3a Allahi a7ada" => masadjid belong to Allah.
  2. Obedience. We obey parents, teachers, state laws, elders, siblings, police officer. How is it different to obey Allah? Isn't it shirk to obey someone else but Allah? No, unless if obeying someone else means you are going to disobey Allah than it is shirk. Example: you are supposed to pray - which is a command from Allah. Your dad says "pray later, I need you now". Now you got obedience to parents and Allah that are conflicting: we need to obey Allah.
  3. Trust. Do I trust my parents? Yes. My teachers as well. My friends ok. My wife. You have to trust Allah. Is it true that we can trust only Allah. When it comes to the unseen yes. The future, right or wrong, priority or not priority then you trust Allah's decision. You have to trust Him that what you are going through is best for you. You have to trust him that no matter what, you should be grateful. That takes a lot of trust. For everyone, trust is earned. The trust in Allah is always here, it is not earned. Allah is reliable above everything. People can fail your trust, Allah never do.
  4. Love. We have to intensly love Allah. controversial statement: "People pray to Allah when it is time for salah. But most of the other time, they are praying to their phones". We show Allah love only at time of prayer. Love is directly associated with what is in your mind. Love is shown by what takes most of the time in your head. What do you think most of the time? Who do you spend time with most of the time? What do you like doing most of the time? If you love something you want to use it. If you love someone, you want to be with them. This is love, practically speaking. Shirk of love is committed when my love for my parents, or children, my spouse is not based on the love I have for Allah. If out of love of my wife, I do things Allah doesn't like or hate, then this is shirk in love. It is ok in Islam to love money: Allah mentions it in the Quran. Love of money should not take us away from what Allah loves. A test for yourself to see if you have a shirk problem: imagine that the thing you love the most is gone; if you loose it and don't want to live after this, then you have a shirk problem.
  5. The terms of the relationship. What you have to do at the job is not determined by you. It is determined by the employer. However, there is place for space for negociation. Like in a marriage, you are supposed to negociate who does what in the household in terms of responsibilities. Allah is my master and I am his slave so He decides. And I have no saying in the terms of the relationship. Allah decides and I obey. I do not get to decide what is worship, what is love, trust, obedience: He will decide that for me. Some people, when describing their relationship with Allah starts with "To me": "To me, obeying Allah means being good to others" etc. This relationship is not up to you. As a slave, we have no status in that relationship.