NAK TO 4

surat luqman (31) ayat 12 -> 19

For each of the ayas there is a set of lessons that we will explain.

A father is giving advice to his son. This man is not a prophet but a very wise man. Quran is only about 600 pages which is very little because 15 lines/page. Quran is the last communication Allah decided to have with humanity. The torah is much longer (5 books). Quran has a lot of repetitions => very few ideas. If It's the last time, why is it so brief and it is repeating itself. Quran is a teaching "3alama el Quran", Allah want to make sure we get it and this is why there are so many repetitions.
This discussion from Luqman who not a prophet but one person who lived on earth at some point and gave a lesson to his son and Allah witnessed it like he witnesses everything. Out of the billion discussions that occurred, Allah choose this one to reveal. And since it is the last message to humanity and it is a short one, it means that this example is of real value to us.
Allah is making an interjection which consists in quoting, then stopping to comment it and then continuing the quote.

"wa laqad ayna ta el lu9man el 7ikma" -> "we had certainly given Luqman wisdom". Luqman is actually a very famous people in history. Even people who didn't believe in Islam and even before Islam, Luqman was known as being a very wise person. People used to come to the prophet and tell them like "You think there was no one wise before you? There was Luqman". Allah steps in and tells us that "Yes, I gave wisdom to Luqman", he didn't get it on his own. The lesson to take is that we do not dismiss people just because they are not muslims or just listen to people we want to listen to. Luqman lived at a time between prophets so he did not have any prophet to follow but by his wisdom, he was already believing in one god. Allah grants wisdom to whoever he wants. Thoughts about Wisdom: someone who says deep things, speak in big vocabulary, old who experienced life. Ancient arab culture loved simplifying things. They simplified their definition of wisdom and here it is: when you have correct knowledge and you act on it. Often people have correct knowledge but do not act on it. Wisdom is something practical to the arabs. It means that Luqman has knowledge and acts on it. Knowledge is acquired early in life but action is acquired over time.

"anachkour lilah" -> "be grateful to Allah". It is not "to be grateful to Allah" but "be grateful to Allah". When you say "be grateful" is a command. Luqman understood that it is compulsory to be grateful to Allah. The second meaning is "be grateful for Allah's sake" <=> "be grateful because of Allah". -- 23:41 -- He understood that he had to be positive no matter what. Being grateful is the ultimate wisdom. The wise thing to do in life is to understand what I can be grateful about even in this crazy situation. You are grateful when you get something you didn't deserve. We need to remember that nothing we have is something we deserve: why do I have AC in my house and this guy is just homeless. Complaints are a proof that we think we deserve something. If we thought we didn't deserve anything we would never complain: I didn't deserve it and I didn't get it, fine. It is not said "be grateful only to Allah", we need to be grateful to parents, teachers, friends, stranger who helped you on the road, someone who advised you and others. People you are grateful to are a gift from Allah to you: friends, parents, siblings.

Usually when you are grateful, it helps someone else. When sending a card or saying thank you, it is a gesture to someone else "wa man yachkour fa inama yachkourou li nafsihi" -> "whoever is grateful is only truly grateful for his own benefit". It is benefiting you to be grateful. Glass is always half full for you. Believing in god is not just believing that god exists as an invisible power that does everything that created the universe. Believing in Allah leads to certain kind of attitudes and the firat attitude that the Quran talks about in believing in Allah is GRATEFULNESS. Becoming someone positive, not a person who does not care. Always seeing value in people. We should instill gratitude in people by not mocking them. the arabic for ingratitude is "kofr" => to the arabs disbelief <=> ingratitude This is why sourat al Fatiha starts with "El Hamdoulilah".